Narrative Visualization Essay

CS 416: Data Visualization

Joydeep Mukherjee (joydeep2)

The message I am trying to communicate with this visualization is about how major events across different spheres of life have affected the S&P 500 index, and stock market in general, over the last 30 years. While we may not realize it in our day-to-day lives, many events have had significant impacts on stock market trends, in both positive and negative ways. This visualization is a tool to help the viewer understand and visualize these trends easily.

The narrative visualization follows the interactive slide show structure. The slide show is comprised of five different slides (scenes), organized in temporal order. Navigation buttons above the scene allow the viewer to move through the slide show. In any scene, the viewer can drill-down into details with tooltips which provide more insights on-demand.

The visual structure of each scene comprises of a line chart, plotting time versus the S&P 500 index value. The continuous data on both axes makes the line chart a good choice to visualize how the value of the stock market index changes over time. Each scene introduces data and annotations for a new segment of time. These elements of the chart are highlighted in a bolded stroke, drawing the viewer to focus on what is important: the new time period and data which was introduced. Additionally, upward ("bullish") trends within the market are highlighted in green, while downward ("bearish") trends within the market are highlighted in red, to draw the reader's attention to the positive and negative impacts of the events being discussed. To help the viewer transition to other scenes, the data from past scenes remains on the screen without a "refresh" (i.e. the viewer does not see a full redrawing of data from previous slides). This smoothens the viewer's experience between the scenes, keeping them oriented during transitions and emphasizing the continuity of the trends within the data. Finally, there is a tooltip activated over the line chart which displays the value of the S&P 500 index, along with the last time the market index hit that value (or an indication that it was an all-time high).

The scenes in the narrative visualization are organized temporally, with each scene corresponding to a different period in time, in context of the scenes preceding it. The five scenes are titled "Early 2000s: The Dot-Com Bubble" (1990-2003), "Late 2000s: The Great Recession and Housing Crisis" (2003-2009), "2010s: Growth and the COVID-19 Pandemic" (2009-2020), "2020 - 2022: Recession Fears and Conflict" (2020-2022), and "2023: Recovery and the Future" (2023). Ordering the scenes by passing time makes sense for this visualization, as the goal is to view trends within the S&P 500 over time.

The annotations use a simple design, based on a line ending with a dot, which enforces visual consistency and clarity. The annotations contain sentences of information about different events, and occasionally may also include the updated value of a hypothetical $10,000 investment made in January 1990. The monetary (dollar) value of this investment provides the viewer an easily understood metric for how the market is evolving. Multiple annotations are often present within a single scene to point out closely related events and the drastic changes which they cause. If the viewer wants more context, the annotations can be complemented by information from a tooltip with details on-demand about the S&P 500 index at a given point in time.

The main parameters of the narrative visualization are the scene, time, annotation visuals, line chart visuals, and tooltip enablement. The scene parameter defines which of the five scenes the user is currently viewing. The time parameter is the time period of the data in the visualization. This parameter defines various time periods (1990-2003, 2003-2009, 2009-2020, 2020-2022, 2023) which correspond to the five scenes and scene parameter. The annotation visuals are a state variable which describe how the annotations should be displayed: annotations from prior time periods are grayed out, while annotations corresponding to the current time period are bolded. Similarly, the line chart visuals are bolded for the current time period. The tooltip enablement state configures whether the tooltip is visible to the viewer as well as its position on the screen. All of these parameters are used together to define the important details within each scene.

The triggers in the visualization connect user actions to changes of each of the state variables. For example, the user may advance forward and backward through the scenes. This action maps to an update of the scene state. In turn, this triggers an update of the time period state. The annotation visuals state is also updated by the change of the scene state, since annotations prior to the current scene are grayed out depending on which scene is active. Similarly, the time period state triggers an update of the line chart visuals, making certain parts of the line chart more bold than others. Finally, other user actions such as mouse-hovering over the line chart triggers the tooltip enablement state, displaying more information about the S&P 500 index value. Rather than using Voronoi-based affordances for the tooltipwhich could potentially block the user's view of other annotations, the activation radius around each tooltip was made larger the width of the line on the line chart. This way, the tooltip is displayed when the mouse is placed close to the line, but is neither excessively large (in the case of a Voronoi diagram) nor extremely difficult to hit (such as when tooltips activate only when the mouse is on the line).
